[Music]
The thing about the person who was stuck
and feeling trapped is typically any
kind of resistance
got more of the thing that they were
trying to avoid. But all of the
resistance makes it more and more and
more stuck. You have one option. You can
go, "Oh, look. I'm frozen. I wonder when
I'll thaw. I can just relax and check
this out." And you'll thaw quicker.
[Music]
Thanks for joining us this week on the
art of accomplishment where we explore
living the life you want with enjoyment
and ease. This week we're talking about
stuckness. We're going to talk about how
stuckness forms in childhood, how it
shows up in adulthood, some of the
trauma patterns around stuckness, and
how to move stuckness in your life
emotionally, on a nervous system level,
and intellectually. Joe, you were
working with somebody the other day who
was feeling really stuck in their life
in a life that they really didn't want
to live and within five minutes they
started seeing all kinds of new
possibilities. How does that person get
unstuck and move on in their life?
>> Yeah, that's a great question. So, I
think the first thing that you have to
do is decide, you know, like actually
define what stuck is. And the most
simple thing to say is stuck is an
emotion. It's an emotional experience.
meaning that if you don't feel stuck,
are you stuck? So, for instance,
um we're stuck with gravity. We're stuck
with the sun. We're stuck on Earth.
>> Shoot,
>> right? But we don't feel stuck in these
ways. Typically, most of us don't. Maybe
a couple couple people do fighting
gravity.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. So, so you actually it's a
feeling. It's not a reality. meaning
that we're stuck in tons of ways and we
don't feel stuck. And oftentimes we feel
stuck in ways that we actually aren't.
So that's the first thing about the
definition of stuckness. But the other
thing that I think is really important
is that there's I would say there's a
distinction between two forms of stuck.
And one is oh I'm working on a problem
and I'm stuck. And the other one is I'm
trapped. I'm trapped in my marriage. I'm
stuck. I'm trapped in this depression.
I'm stuck. I'm trapped in this
>> this uh way of thinking. I'm stuck. I'm
trapped feeling these emotions. I'm
stuck.
>> So, one's sort of like I can't get out
of where I am and the other one is I
can't get to where I'm trying to go.
Yeah. Sort of like that.
>> Yeah. One is oh, there's this problem
that I'm I'm trying to solve and one is
I am trapped and I don't know how to get
out and there's almost always an
oppressor with it. There's almost always
this
thought process of oppression.
And it and it's typically what I notic
is that when people who have a tendency
to get there often who often feel that
feeling of stuck
often had a childhood where they were
put in now situations where they
couldn't get out of the situation
meaning that they couldn't be themselves
and please their parents or that they
had to be a very particular way or they
suffered some sort of abuse that was no
win and so all they could do was just
freeze. Typically that's something that
happens with somebody who feels that
that trapped often over and over again.
>> Yeah. Trapped becomes the best strategy
in that case.
>> Yeah. Exactly.
>> Yeah. The best thing you can do is just
stay where you are and hope the
situation changes,
>> right? Because you know any move you're
going to make, you're going to get
yelled at because the mom or the dad or
the brother or the sister, the teacher,
>> they were gonna attack you no matter
what. They were gonna do whatever
because it wasn't about you. Never was
about you. So So that that's the second
form. And the interesting thing is that
the solution for both is often very
similar.
>> And the the former the kind of solving a
problem, you can see this in a lot of
places. People who are looking for their
soulmate for like 40 years, people who
are trying to find their purpose or
there's there can often just be some
sort of uh uh like mythical unicorn that
they're after.
>> It can be something that's right in
front of them like I don't know what to
do about this job offer,
>> right? And it can also just be something
that just lasts for decades that they
just continue to play out this pattern
with.
>> Yes.
>> With finding finding a meaningful
career, finding
uh community. I'm remembering now a time
when I was I was doing a base jump. I
was I jumped from some bridge in Idaho
in December. I was just learning to jump
and I had gotten dropped off by my
instructor who had to go to work. He
just gave me a bunch of parachutes and
said, "Go for it." My first jump, I
landed in the freezing water and then I
had to climb out of the canyon and I'd
never climbed that route before, but it
was basically just a sheer face.
And there was a moment where I got
totally stuck and I'm starting like my
clothes are freezing, my feet are
freezing, and I had to step on like a
little wedge of rock with my frozen shoe
and balance my weight on it to not fall
100 feet. and I didn't know the next
move. And it was interesting how while I
was moving, I was just moving. But the
moment I stopped and didn't know what to
do next, I felt oppressed. I felt like
everything was mean to me personally.
How did I get into this position? Why
did this happen? What's up with the
stupid cliff? Why did I get dropped off
and not like have somebody like walking
me out, showing me the way? And the
moment I started moving again, which it
was about 20 minutes, I was just hanging
out there just feeling stuck.
>> Oh wow.
>> And so I made sort of like a leap of
faith. I made the step, balanced on it,
reached and just happened to find
another thing to grab.
>> Yeah.
>> The moment I was moving again, I was
unoppressed. I was just on an adventure.
>> Yeah. And that's the amazing thing is it
it literally is like that except for we
believe our thoughts far more when it's
I'm stuck by this political party or I'm
stuck by my wife or I'm stuck by my kids
or I'm like we'll believe the story of
blame even more when we're our brain can
actually wrap a story around it. It's
harder to wrap a story of this [__]
rock it's trying to kill me, you know,
>> but we still do it. We still have that
feeling. Yeah. How did I do this to
myself? you know, and and so it's a
really interesting thing how our mind
does that. And and you're you're dead on
in the fact that oftentimes the reason
that someone feels stuck is because they
can't figure out how to get to the end
that they want to get to.
>> And so oftentimes, one of the things is
just like what's the next most obvious
step? What's the little bit of movement
that you can do? What's the little thing
you can do to find out a little bit
more? The other thing that I think is
important is that
downtime is really important. There's a
huge amount of studies and we can put
them in the in the in the notes that
show that
you need to have a time where you don't
understand and you don't know what to do
if you are going to integrate new
knowledge. So
we can call that good if we're not
resisting it and we can call that stuck
if we're resisting it. So in our work
for instance we do we talk about
something called the 404 which is system
error page not found right it and it's
where the person's like
like they can't they can't put their
world back together in that moment and
that is critical we are really happy
when somebody has that space and we'll
tell them as you know we'll tell them
hey okay don't try to put it back
together don't try to create a new story
yet be in the unknown for a while be in
a place where you can't figure it out
for a while because the longer you're in
that place, the quicker you integrate.
And there's a tremendous amount of
studies that show like if you're pushing
for results, if you are trying to get
unstuck too quickly, your epiphany comes
slower, if it comes at all. I had a
friend who was an artist and he said 80%
of his art was just looking at the
canvas. You just sit there and look at
the canvas. or famous mathematician who
I think won the Nobel Prize was asked
about his process and he said I think
about the the the problem as much as I
can like I exhaust myself thinking about
it and then I refuse to think about it
until the solution presents itself in
whole.
>> Yeah. Or we've got Michelangelo and the
statue of David. Like how how stuck was
he when he was just sitting there
staring at a rock for a long time?
>> Exactly. if he had been to in
self-criticism about that or if somebody
in modern times was watching him and
being like, "This guy's a stone carver
and he's just sitting there staring at a
stone for how long,"
>> right? Yeah. And and and there's
actually some evidence that shows about
epiphany or solving problems that that
liinal space is really important. But
there's also there's a guy named
Newberg.
He's an MD and he and he basically does
brain scans and stuff of folks who are
having epiphany or awakening
experiences. And he talks about that
same thing being necessary. It's it's
it's you you go into a space and then
you drop out of it and be in nothingness
for a while. That actually has the that
creates the epiphany. And we see that
all the time in our work. You see people
have these massive breakthroughs,
>> but it it comes from being in that 404.
It comes from being in that space of
unknown. And
>> if you're digging it, if you know it's
good, you're like, "Cool. I'm in wonder.
Cool. I don't know what's happening. And
this is a really good sign." But if you
are afraid of it, like, "Oh, my whole
world's going to fall apart. I don't
know what's around the corner. I don't
know that the thing's going to be there
in the cliff." then you feel stuck and
trapped and oppressed because you don't
have a story to put to it.
>> So in that sense you could you could
frame stuckness as intolerance for the
unknown or for uncertainty.
>> Yeah. Especially when it is the working
out of a problem.
>> Um oftent times what's happening in the
other side is uh that on the there
there's more going on. When you feel
trapped there's something else going on
besides that.
>> Yes. There's also, oh, I don't feel like
I'm in control. I don't have patience
for the uncertainty. But there's also
that feeling of oppression. And that
feeling of oppression on an emotional
level is repressed anger. The natural
reaction to oppression is
getting angry, is being pissed. I, you
know, and so, so there's a fear that's
going on. The fear is, oh, I don't see a
result I can get to that pleases me. So,
I might be able to see the next step,
but I can't see a way to get to the
result.
>> So, I feel trapped. If I do this, I'm
screwed. If I feel do that, I'm screwed.
>> So, you have that thing.
>> If I tell my wife I'm upset and she
leaves me, then I don't get the thing
that I want. So, I can't share my
feelings about what's going on. Exactly.
And now I'm stuck and I'm oppressed by
my wife.
>> Right. But if I don't share my feelings
and I can't be myself and I can't be
loved, so I'm stuck.
>> So, I'm stuck sharing my feelings. I'm
stuck not sharing my feelings.
>> Yeah. So, you mentioned oppressed anger.
I'm also curious about the fear here
because you know freeze is one of the
canonical fear responses.
>> Yeah, exactly. So, so that's that's
right. So, typically the stuck feeling
comes like I said with when people in
their childhood were put into situations
where they couldn't win, right? And so
there's fear with that and there's the
feeling of oppression with that. The
first feeling to move to get the most
bang for your buck is to move the anger.
The second feeling to move is often the
fear,
>> right? But
>> it's oftentimes like the the that person
in that situation, all they could do was
be still because any move was going to
get them yelled at. And if they got
yelled at for being frozen, it didn't
last as long as if they actually
participated, if they didn't play back.
But oftentimes that fear can't be
expressed without a whole bunch of anger
moving because I mean being trapped like
that it's shitty. Like of course we're
going to get angry. Of course we're
going to get angry. And then there's the
fear as well.
>> And so typically when people feel
trapped they have plenty of options.
Like 99.99999%
of the time when I'm talking to somebody
they
think they're stuck but it's they're not
at all stuck. Right? So to to make this
really apparent, there are people right
now in the Ukraine who've been in
trenches for months at a time in cold,
muddy, crappy conditions and they don't
feel stuck. But there's somebody right
now behind a keyboard in an office and
they feel stuck.
>> As if they can't just get up and walk
out and leave the office and never come
back. as if like that could they could
be stopped.
>> Yeah.
>> And what's actually happening there is
that they feel like I don't want this
consequence and I don't want this
consequence and my brain can't show me
anything besides these two consequences
and so I'm going to go into one of those
places and I'm stuck.
>> Yeah. I'm curious to go back to the
anger and the fear there because there's
sort of a symmetry.
>> Yeah.
>> Where you could say the opposite of
stuckness is
>> I will I will express myself. I will be
myself despite the consequences.
>> Correct. So if you move the anger,
that's sort of the I will express and be
myself part. Yeah. And then moving the
fear, feeling the fear all the way is
the despite the consequences,
>> right?
>> Part of that.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. A and feeling the fear
actually puts you in touch with the
excitement and the aliveness of of what
happens when you are yourself.
>> When you are being yourself, it's
actually quite invigorating. It's it's
it's energizing. It's, you know, my
daughter right now, um, she's she's
moved off to a college
and there was a a way before when she
was in high school, she was just always
herself. And in college, you're making
new friends, you're learning new things
and she was wrestling with, oh, I'm kind
of made fun of for this or I'm doing
this and and okay, I've kind of started
to accommodate people
by not being myself. And that started to
feel like [__] It started weigh on her,
started to make her feel worse about
herself, which made her feel more stuck,
right? Because then you're in this
mental trap.
And
when she decided, which luckily didn't
take her very long, oh no, I'm going to
be myself despite the consequences
because I'm not loved
as myself unless I'm being myself.
All of a sudden, she's just feeling so
much more invigorated, so much more
alive, so much more good about herself.
And so there's this weird thing that
happens when you convince yourself that
you can't be yourself despite the
consequences.
It like creates depression. It creates
like this low level and then higher
higher level of depression. And so one
of the things I notice is someone who's
constantly feeling trapped, they're
usually getting closer and closer to
deeper and deeper depression.
>> Maybe depression is some form of like
self- oppression. like you are shutting
down your own natural impulses,
>> right?
>> Which I don't even want to say you are
because that implies that it's a
personal choice that you're making,
>> right? If you say you are, that's great.
You say you are, the person who is
feeling that way is feels like we'll
take that as more shame.
>> Yeah.
>> More I'm bad and then they're more self-
oppression. So, it's usually like a
horrible way to think about it,
>> right? But also just to double click on
this further, there's
>> you can go anywhere on the internet and
you'll find people saying, "Oh, just be
yourself." And
>> like, "Duh, life will be better. Be
yourself." And you can intellectually
buy that,
>> right?
>> And yet, how does that how does that
translate? How do you get that deeper
into your body to the place where
>> the freeze isn't happening anymore?
Yeah. Or or if the freeze is happening,
you do something with it that's more
constructive and more Yeah.
>> Uh and you can see the the freedom in
it.
>> Yeah. So, let's talk about that. So
nervous system level, the free, the
nervous system, the gut level, the
freeze is is a real tricky slimy thing
in the fact that the more you try to get
out of the freeze, the more you freeze.
The more you try to get out of the
liinal space, the longer you're stuck
there.
So trying to get out of it really,
really doesn't work. And anybody who
freezes knows this. They sit there, they
freeze, and they're like, "Don't freeze.
Don't freeze. Don't freeze." And they
just keep on freezing. So, you have one
option. You can go, "Oh, look. I'm
frozen. I wonder when I'll thaw. I can
just relax and check this out." And
you'll thaw quicker for sure. The other
kind of hack move is hack as in it's a
hack like it can speed it up is to
double your freeze, triple your freeze,
quadruple your freeze, like because what
that is doing is it's it's not
resisting. So the thing about the person
who was stuck and feeling trapped is
typically any kind of resistance
got more of the thing that they were
trying to avoid. But all of the
resistance makes it more and more and
more stuck.
>> You could even say that the stuckness is
putting pressure on yourself. Yes. And
if you are trying to resist the
stuckness, you're adding more pressure.
>> Exactly.
>> So you're just fighting the part of you
that's fighting yourself. Yeah. Harder.
>> Yeah. So, the nervous system, that's
that's where where you go. The the um
the emotional is the what we talked
about, which is moving anger is probably
for most people the quickest way to move
out of stuck. Um moving fear also really
important. Sometimes grief, but just
generally moving your emotions is going
to make people feel very unstuck. And we
I mean, you know, we've seen that
hundreds thousands of times now. And
then
and then there's the intellectual part
of being stuck, which is understanding
that
your stuckness is basically trying to
avoid an emotional state. And most
likely that emotional state is the
removal of love
or we're going to get in trouble. So
we're generally in broad strokes trying
to avoid the removal of love or getting
in trouble, getting attacked. That is
that's what is actually happening. And
the weird part is if you intellectually
see this is that what's actually
happening is you are removing love from
yourself and you are attacking yourself.
So you're actually not avoiding it.
>> Yeah.
>> So when you can really see that click
like, oh, I'm feeling stuck because
let's say that wife example
or husband example, I can't say my peace
because they'll attack me.
Um, and if I can't say my peace and I
can't be happy in this marriage
and I can't leave the marriage because
then I won't have any love.
That's basically that feeling of
trapped. You're not giving yourself love
by not speaking who you're tr you you
are speaking your truth. you are
attacking yourself by constantly beating
yourself up for not for being stuck,
right? Or for not saying your peace in
the marriage or whatever the thing is.
And so you're you're basically doing it
all to yourself already. So if you can
intellectually see that, oh crap, like
this is all happening. And that's
typically what we do when we were kids
is what we did was we
convinced ourselves basically
it's easier feels better to attack
myself before I get attacked by somebody
else.
>> Remove my self-connection before someone
else something away in a way it's super
painful.
>> Exactly. Cuz if it's not my fault then
my parents are [__] completely
incompetent and holy [__]
>> I'm only three years old. What the [__]
So to be clear, these strategies worked
as they were developed. Of course they
they were the perfect strategy at that
time and now you're just continuing
them. And it doesn't need to be the same
world. Now you may recreate a world
that's somewhat similar. Find the
partner who is that way with you and
who's ready to criticize you or like let
you take the blame or whatever whatever
it is.
>> And the one who will attack you when
you're like you're just going to attack
me. And they get angry when you say
that. And then there you are in the
>> in the dynamic. Totally.
>> And yet
you are you are doing it first in this
in the sense like you are choosing to
remove the love from yourself.
>> Correct.
>> By deciding that your needs don't matter
enough to express.
>> Yes.
>> That your feelings aren't worth bringing
into the relationship. That the
relationship isn't going to be improved
and the other person's life isn't going
to be improved by you bringing up the
scary wants, the scary truths for you.
>> That's right. And you're also attacking
yourself in
preventing like you have to physically
shut that down. You have to physically
constrict and close down that impulse.
Yeah.
>> And create stories about blame for
yourself to keep it all locked in place
in a little cage.
>> Yeah.
>> And that is self-aggression.
>> Yeah. And so, so basically
the healing that happens to if you're in
a perpetual sense of stuckness, the
healing that happens is you have to go
back into those childhood moments. You
don't have to actually do it, but you
have to
feel the anger and the fear that was
actually there that you weren't allowed
to feel because doing any of that stuff
would just get you attacked more.
>> Yeah. And and then the intellectual part
of it is to see that you're actually not
a kid anymore. And so as trauma is,
trauma pulls you back in time. So the
person who was in Fallujah under attack,
when they get to Cleveland, a car
backfires because they have trauma, they
go right back to Fallujah.
people who feel stuck are going right
back to their childhood, but it's not
actually that's not the reality anymore.
>> And so it's to see that that's not the
reality. It's to move the anger and fear
that couldn't be moved then. And for the
nervous system, it is gentleness, which
is what they didn't get as a kid, or
the actual reverse movement of stuck,
right? It's the I'm going to double
stuck, triple stuck, quadruple stuck
because it's like
>> to exhaust the stuckness.
>> It's to exhaust the stuckness.
>> Yeah. Sort of like the the soaz release
exercises where you lean up against the
wall in certain ways and it tires out
all the muscles around your soaz muscle,
which is this biggest muscle in your
body that
>> holds a lot of tension and trauma. And
once you've finally exhausted all the
muscles around it, you can lay down and
put your knees up in a certain way that
your soaz just shakes and releases a lot
of held tension.
>> Yeah, that's right. Yeah. Or there's all
sorts of modalities where you push up
against something for a while and then
then you have the bigger stretch from
it. Yeah.
>> Exactly.
>> Yeah. So, I want to double click a
little bit on the sort of the the
mechanism of moving anger or moving
fear.
>> Yeah.
>> Because there's there's something here.
We're just talking kind of abstractly.
Oh, you move your anger and then X
happens.
>> Yeah.
>> And I'm I'm curious. So,
>> what I imagine happens if somebody's got
the pattern where when their fear comes
up, they shut it down, then what that
teaches them is I can't protect myself.
>> Correct.
>> Which means you are very oppressible.
>> Yeah. So I'm I'm imagining that
>> which very very oppressible I think is
incredibly like an incredibly important
phrase.
>> And what I mean there is that usually
people who oppress
people who are who looking for victims
for their behavior can actually spot
that exact quality with laser precision.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. There's this study that was done
of some aggressive people who, you know,
I can't I don't think they were rapists,
but there were people who like stole
purses or something and they just had
them watch people who were crossing the
crosswalk and they could just say that
person, that person. They all agreed on
who was the who was the victim.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. And so there's a weird way in
which you're inviting it. If you
actually feel stuck, you're inviting an
oppression. You're inviting oppressors
>> or at least you're you're putting off
something that people will recognize and
they can manipulate.
>> Yeah.
>> Like the the aggressive abusive boss
will tend to find the person who's going
to acquies to all of their demands until
eventually the whole thing falls apart
and it doesn't work for anybody
>> or freeze
>> or freeze,
>> right? Like, oh wait, every time I am a
little frustrated, you freeze. So now I
feel like I can't depend on you. That
really [__] frustrates me. I'm going
to even be more frustrated. Right?
There's all these ways in which that
pattern invites the oppression.
>> Yeah. So, so functionally moving anger
is the process of
taking space to fully deeply feel your
anger in a way that's not going to
destroy anything, in a way that's not
going to like recreate or reinvite any
of the patterns that
>> it's not going to hurt anybody. It's not
going to be it's not going to make
anybody feel threatened. It's just
moving anger. It's just yelling,
screaming, hitting,
>> getting angry.
>> Yeah. And getting to a place where you
feel in your own anger like, "Oh, this
is what it's like for me to be really
angry." Like, what does it feel like to
really stand up for myself, to really
protect myself, to really care for
myself?
>> Yeah.
>> To really like draw a boundary to
present my aggression in a such a way
that I'm going to push on the world if
it pushes back on me. And I'm going to
assert what I care about. I'm going to
assert what's what's mine. And I can be
met with someone else's aggression and
we'll have a dialectic. You know, if I
don't want to do this job that I'm doing
in my work and like I feel overtaxed and
I can just speak to that. If I know that
I will say something about it, then I
don't need to be so afraid of somebody
handing me an extra task. I can just
say, "Oh, if that if that happens, if I
feel overloaded, I'm gonna talk about
how I feel overloaded and what I need in
a way that doesn't put blame on anyone
else."
>> Right.
>> Yeah. I mean, you you like the classic
story in in um in movies is
>> the kid who felt oppressed by the father
and at some point just goes bam and hits
and, you know, gets big enough where he
hits back on the father and then doesn't
feel oppressed by the father anymore.
And it's the same thing. It's basically
you were a kid and this emotional
experience got stuck and you're
unsticking it. You couldn't run, you
couldn't fight, you froze. Now you can
like move that running, you can move
that fighting and you can and you can
like unstick the pattern.
>> Yeah. And in in that canonical movie
example, typically the father's response
is first shock.
>> Yes.
>> Then fear.
>> Then respect.
>> Right. Oh, you know what? Okay.
>> Yeah. Often, right?
>> This was coming and
>> Right. Yeah.
>> Great.
>> Or or leaving
>> or leaving or something. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> So, I want to move on to the fear side
then. So, when we when removing fear,
what does that look like? What is the
how is that functionally moving through
us and
>> it's a shaking of the body. So, if you
have a um a deer who got caught by a
mountain lion and then gets somehow gets
free, you'll see them. they'll shake
their whole body.
>> And so making sounds of fear, shaking
your body, that's what it is to be
moving fear. And it can be very subtle
shaking and it could just be like
howling, yelling, but it's it's allowing
your body to move the fear. It's it's
going and it's particularly powerful if
you go back to the environment. The the
issue with moving fear by yourself is
that oftentimes fear comes because
you're by yourself. So, it's far better
to be in a group to move your fear. Have
have support and love and support while
you're moving your fear because
otherwise you're still all alone in it.
So, that's one of the things I really
recommend to do with people. I I
recommend moving all of your emotions
with people. So, that's why in master
class or decisions course, we move
emotions with people.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and then all of the inperson work, we
move emotions with people, but fear in
particular really important.
>> Yeah. And coming back to the veterans
example, you know, there there are
modalities like therapeutic shaking
where
>> people just lay down and they shake.
They you just let your body shake. Yeah.
>> It's it's what what m land mammals do.
>> Yes.
>> Some some even not like I think uh
>> I think even whales
>> I think I read somewhere that whales
actually have some shaking behavior.
Dogs do it all the time.
>> And as a matter of fact, there was this
I remember I think we talked about this
in another podcast like it was 60
minutes. It was 1980s or something and
there was this 90-year-old guy dancing
on the dance floor. It was just like
just poster disco kind of in that area
and and I remember there like what's the
trick for being 90 and living such a
vivacious life and he said oh that's
easy and he just laid down on the floor
and like shook like he was in an
epileptic seizure. And I was like
>> what? Cuz I was very young at the time.
I was like what what what was that? And
I remember what was it like whatever 20
years later I'm sitting on the ground
shaking like that and I'm like oh yeah
that's so good.
>> But yeah I I remember that reflection.
>> There's something also that I think is
often missed in the way people talk
about like trauma release and like fear
release and
>> it's not just something that happens
where your body shakes and moves and
then you get up and move like nothing
happened. Yeah, I've noticed that the
biggest movements happened in me that
also included some form of meaning
adjustment in my system. Like my body
shook to represent a real fear of
something like death. And I had to
actually reckon with and feel that. And
having felt that I then move forward in
a different way. I see life differently.
>> Like back on that cliff and I didn't
know what to do.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, I was between a rock and a
cold place. Literally, if I stayed there
much longer, I was going to get weaker
and weaker and weaker until I died.
>> Yeah.
>> And I could move forward and I might
slip and fall and die.
>> Right.
>> So, I had to hang out with that fear of
death
>> knowing that it was there was a
significant chance of death either way,
but eventually I had to recognize that
there was guaranteed death this way,
>> right?
>> So, I had to continue moving.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And I think that's not so
dissimilar from the experience that
people have when they are stuck where
the thing that they needed to do when
they were kids, when they were in those
formative experiences was freeze, not
make a big fuss, not move,
>> wait for the storm to pass and survive.
And there comes a point where you can
recognize in your life now that
I am doing this to myself every day.
>> I am removing the love from myself.
>> Every day I am trapping myself with my
mind every day. And what I see when
people really solve this puzzle about
feeling stuck all the time in their
life, one of the things that I notice
that um is really clear in them is that
the only thing they were ever stuck with
was their thoughts.
>> It was a set of thoughts, right? It's if
you're not scared of death, just to be
extreme about it, person with a gun
can't oppress you. You can't be stuck.
You just have some choices to make.
Yeah.
Yeah. Even if you're in a prison cell.
>> Even if you're in a prison cell,
>> there are many people who have been in
prison cells for a very long time and
they were not stuck. The moment they got
out, they were moving as though they had
been cooking that entire time.
>> That's right.
>> Their consciousness constantly
transforming into whatever it was that
made them
>> Yeah. I mean, it's amazing, right? Three
years in prison for one person is
completely stuck. three years in
what is it like I think there's some
some monks that they're in like for
three years or two years or something
they're in a 2 and 1/2 by 2 and 1/2 like
foot room and they can't even lay down.
It's like far harsher. Yeah.
>> And they call that like awakening.
Somebody else calls it stuck in a
prison.
>> Right. And then I've heard of somebody
who did like a six-year
meditation silent darkness retreat in a
house and afterwards they were like,
"Well, that was a waste of time."
>> Oh my god. If you ever find that person,
I want to talk to them because I could
see saying that in in meaning it in a
very particular way, which is so much
freedom. And I can also see it like, oh,
I like some sort of shame cycle of doing
it, which would be
>> yeah, unbelievable.
>> I mean, throwing away again, it's like
it's a very specific nuance on how you
want to frame frame that internally, but
yeah, I can see that going a long way,
>> which is exactly the metaphor for
stuckness.
>> It's an internal framing.
It is not an actuality.
>> We're all evolving until we die and then
we're all decomposing.
>> Yeah. This reminds me of the beginning
of another coaching session that you had
with another person who was stuck and it
was just your first question was are you
stuck or do you feel stuck?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly.
>> Because they came in saying I feel stuck
literally that was what they said.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think also for
people who are really interested, the
next thing I would uh watch or pay
attention to is the anger podcast. I
think that's where you're going to for
people who feel stuck, they're going to
get a lot of freedom out of the anger
podcast. That usually is the first move
is to not resist the stuckness, even go
super stuck and then really move that
anger is usually the first best move
that I find for them.
>> Yeah. Then we've got several on fear.
>> Yeah. as well.
>> Helplessness, the cayenne pepper of
fear. What else could somebody do if
they really want to go down the rabbit
hole here and work with their stuckness?
>> We have uh those five free workshops
that we do that are the the gateway of
transformation or or really how to
approach self
work that makes it really effective. And
all of those things really help people
get unstuck as well. So, that would be a
great one. And you just sign up for the
newsletter and then you'll be made aware
of them. We do about one a month or
something like that. So, you just go to
our website, arttoofaccomplishment.com,
sign up for the newsletter, and then
those will start coming to you again.
>> Exactly. Exactly. Yeah.
>> Awesome.
>> Yeah.
>> All right. Thank you, Joe.
>> What a pleasure. Good to be with you.
[Music]